LEFEVBRE, Henri. **The Survival of Capitalism**. Nova Iorque: St Martin's Press, (1976) 
	
# Relações:
-  [[Henri Lefevbre]]
- [[0400 Produção do espaço]]
- [[LEFEVBRE. The Survival of Capitalism (1976).pdf]]
	
==tags==: #fichamento #lefevbre #marxismo #produçãoespaço #pse #pseespaço 
# Sumário:  
- [[#Relações]]
- [[#Discovery]]
- [[#Reproduction of relations of production]]

# Discovery 

-  It occupies a central position, displacing and substi­tuting itself for certain widely held philosophical notions or scien­tific specialisations such as "the subject" (whether individual orcollective, cartesian or otherwise), "the object" ("the thing"."the sign", etc.), "structure" and "function" etc.  (Page 7)
- If it iswell determined, it denotes a complex process involving contra­dictions, a process which not only repeats and redoubles thosecontradictions but also displaces, changes and enlarges them.  (Page 8)
-  as well as to the statementsof those who believe it is possible to achieve structural equilibriumand harmony between the various elements of society. (Page 8)
-  Whatis essential is to analyse thoroughly the relations of production."Relations of production" should be understood in Marx's sense,not simply as money and the commodity (the conditions of capital. raised by capitalist activity to the world scale), and not simplyas wages and profit (surplus value), but as the land-labour-capitalrelation. the constitutive trinity of capitalist society.  (Page 8)
- Quite often this ideology can be identified with itsopposite, the ideology of imminent catastrophe (the end in sight,crisis, collapse!). In this kind of analysis (or rather lack ofanalysis) the reproduction of the social relations has gone unnoticed or unintelligible. Those who are caught unawares by thissituation, which is in fact a tacit renewal of capitalism, have comeup with a truly astonishing set of explanations for it: humanstupidity, madness, general delirium, pure violence, etc. (Page 9)
-  ForMarx, of course, the reproduction of the means of production andthe continuity of material production do not take place withoutthe reproduction of social relations, any more than life itselftakes place without the repetition of everyday motions and actions. (Page 9)
- It is at this moment that the mode of production dominatesthe results of history, takes them over and integrates within itselfthe "sub-systems" which had been established before capitalism(i.e. exchange networks of commerce and ideas. agriculture, townand countryside, knowledge, science and scientific institutions,law. the fiscal system, justice etc.). without, however, managing toconstitute itself as a coherent system, purged of contradictions.Those who believe in the system are making a mistake, for infact no complete, achieved totality exists. However, there is cer·tainly a "whole", which has absorbed its historical conditions,reabsorbed its elements and succeeded in mastering some of thecontradictions, though without arriving at the desired cohesionand homogeneity. (Page 10)
- This is what gives the mode of production its highly curiousappearance as it reproduces itself: distinct parts but also theformation of ensembles; the existence of sub-systems, but disorderin the whole; conjoined and disjoined levels; its coherences andcontradictions, its strategies and tactics, its successes and failures. (Page 10)
- It is necessary to sift the various ideas, ideologies. representa­tions and images in order to find out how they have contributedto the renewal of the existing relations, either by stimulating thisreproduction directly, or by obscuring it.  (Page 11)
-  It is not a crime to believe that marxist thought hasplayed a contributory role. even if an involuntary one. by stimulat­ing this reproduction and being co-opted by it. Not at the theore­tical level, where it seems to be fundamentally irreducible, butat the level of practice, where it has given rise to planning, i.e.the manipulation of society by the state. (Page 11)
- There is not and cannot be a simple repro­duction of ideology and of its corollary, repression. There is nore-production of social relations without a certain production ofthose relations; there is no purely repetitive process. (Page 11)
-  The concept of ideology has beenextended beyond all measure, and this has sterilised it. The rela­tion of ideologies to knowledge has been examined while theirrelation to practice has been ignored. The ideologies which arereally effective are hardly distinguishable from practice: they arenot expressed at a distinctly ideological level. and they do notappear as ideologies (Page 12)
-  These ideologies are closely linked with a certain practice,which they contain by concealing, which they distort by maskingits contradictions; any analysis of them needs a "prototype" ofcritical analysis to refer to.  (Page 12)
- Note here how ideology masks the production of new relationsas much as the renewal of the old ones, by masking the variouscontradictions and the critical moment.  (Page 13)
-  It is worth remembering that theurban has no worse enemy that urban planning and "urbanism",which is capitalism's and the state's strategic instrument for themanipulation of fragmented urban reality and the production ofcontrolled space.  (Page 15)
- One of the most surprisingthings about the current situation is surely that the horizonof non-labour, of the great liberation, has come into view not inthe "homelands" of labour and the workers, i.e. the so-calledsocialist countries, but in the most advanced capitalist and im­perialist industrial country, the United States.  (Page 16)
-  The social practice of capitalism implies and containsknowledge, logic (the search for coherence), an ideology of cohe­sion; it also contains contradictions, at the global level. (Page 17)
- Theabstract space of the mathematicians and epistemologists isanswerable to logic. The route from this mental space to socialspace is already, implicitly, a dialectical movement. There canbe no break between them, blocking the route, for the unity be­tween them includes the difference.  (Page 17)
- Centrality collapses in the space which ithas generated, i.e. into the existing relations of production andtheir reproduction. (Page 17)
- The relation betwen centre and periphery is not generated"dialectically" in the course of historical time, but "logically"and "strategically" (Page 17)
- The problems and concepts which have recently arisen con­cerning "the environment", the depletion of resources, the des­truction of nature, etc., only tell half the story concerning thecontradictions of space. They are only fragmentary manifestations;they mask the global problem, which is the problem of space asa whole, its production and management. (Page 18)
- This dialectised, conflictive space is where the reproduction ofthe relations of production is achieved. It is this space that pro­duces reproduction, by introducing into it its multiple contradic­tions, whether or not these latter have sprung from historical time. (Page 19)
- The result has beena vast displacement of contradictions, requiring a detailed com­parative analysis (Page 19)
-  This experience does not amount to a(theoretical) consciousness of surplus value. Yet little by little,consciousness penetrates the experience.  (Page 20)
- He also thought that the bourgeoisie has its own historicmission in the growth of productive forces (Page 20)
- But what has happened is that capitalism has found itself ableto attenuate (if not resolve) its internal contradictions for a cen­tury, and consequently, in the hundred years since the writing ofCapital, it has succeeded in achieving "growth". We cannot cal­culate at what price, but we do know the means: by occupyingspace, by producing a space. (Page 21)
- But from the moment when socialpractice-the social practice of reproduction-became "un­conscious", the loss of meaning acquired a terrifying attraction.It has been a "loss of identity" at the collective level, much morethan at the individual level. This crisis of meaning and identitydoes not only affect individuals, words and concepts. It affectsethnic regions, peoples and nations. Language having no referentialapart from itself, the referential function has been taken over byrhetoric; we are among the meta-languages of publicity, politics,and sheer wind. (Page 21)
-  The more thecontent of the concept is diluted and gets lost in abstraction. themore profound the concept (which actually ceases to be such)appears to be. (Page 22)
- A partial cri­tique, the critique of one aspect which is considered as definingthe whole society, suddenly assumes an excessive importance andseems global; and by way of the same illusion, the most abstractcritique-the critique of critical critique-assumes an air ofliberation. (Page 23)
-  One of the specific con­tradictions of this society is the contradiction between expulsion(the expulsion of whole groups towards the spatial, mental andsocial peripheries) and integration (which remains symbolic, ab­stract and "cultural"). (Page 23)
- The "factors" which permitthe growth of productive forces and maintenance of the relationsof production have damaged social life, consciousness and action,by masking the central phenomenon. (Page 24)
-  The middle classes thuslive on two levels, in a permanent duality or duplicity. At onelevel the individuals judge, criticise, sometimes argue and may evenrefuse. At another level they serve (and receive) the opposite: anillusory delegation of power, which gives them the impressionthat they are doing something different from what they actuallyare doing.  (Page 25)
-  Learning is something social. notmerely mental. and it cannot reproduce itself in the manner ofa "positive" system which supplies its own conditions. (Page 26)
- In spite of all the efforts made by institutions, the contradictionis there: the simple fact is that there is no barrier between "posi­tive" learning and its "negative" side, which is critical thought.The attempt to separate technical knowledge (the applied sciences)from knowledge in general. from basic research, from philosophyor literary criticism (for example), has never really been success­ful. for it is a separation which immediately sterilises appliedknowledge, shrouding "the system" in a quasi-metaphysical uncer­tainty (hence the resurgence of philosophy and religion) and weak­ening it crucially.  (Page 26)
-  The central problem is not "theenvironment" but the problem of space. An eco-system, oncebroken up, cannot reconstruct itself. Once even a fragment dis­appears, then theoretical thought and social practice have to re­create a totality. This cannot be done in bits and pieces; there­fore they have to produce a space (Page 27)
- There is no totalsystem (meta-system) uniting the partial systems or sub-systems.Their cohesion is, rather, the object of a strategy. If there weresuch a thing as a "social logic". all state power would need to dowould be to ''laisser faire". (Page 28)
- There is a strategy, andthis strategy applies general (formal) logic to certain objects. to anend. a perspective. (Page 28)
-  For the town not only represents acolossal accumulation of wealth. it is also the centre of birth andlearning. the point of reproduction of all social relations. But italso becomes the place where these relations are threatened. Thestrategy of political space gives rise to a contradiction.  (Page 28)
- This practiceincludes representations which are linked to actions, whetherdirectly or indirectly, immediately or mediately, close to or at adistance. We also said that the most effective ideology, the mostsecurely linked to practice, does not appear as ideology (Page 29)
- It is a paradox of the rediscovered dialectic that the(apparently) non-ideological becomes ideological, i.e. it turnsinto active and effective ideology. (Page 30)
- Value and valorisations, non-value and devalorisations, alsoconstitute an ideology: formalised or practical systems of valuesare elaborated by the ruling class or by a section of it, or bythe "spheres" of knowledge which it enslaves, or ultimately bypower and the state, in order to maintain the situation (the rela­tions). "Truth" today is scarcely more than a value. The "valueof truth" accompanies and conceals the break-up of the True assuch, which is accompanied by its shadow, its reverse side: the in··vestment of scientifit;: truth in production, in the mode of produc­tion and the reproduction of its relations.  (Page 30)
- The mere appearance of this non-temporal. static model haddisastrous effects (in spite of the endeavours of marxism and dia­lectical thought to introduce some kind of dynamic). It becameimpossible to sort out the "ideology-knowledge" tangle. Psycho­analysis received from Freud an ideology whose contradictionsand whose very existence psychoanalysis concealed, an ideologythat was part judaeo-christianity (unmasked by Nietzsche) andpart western rationalism (greco-roman), with the Logos holdingpleasure and the body in contempt. It is pre-Nietzsche.  (Page 31)
- This poor little worldof wealth is condemned not only to reproduce in order to re­produce itself, together with its constitutive relations, but alsoto present what is repeated as new, and as all the more new (neo)the more archaic it actually is. Reproducibility is a supplementaryguarantee of reproduction. The reproducible and the reproductivegenerate the repetitive.  (Page 32)
-  At best, the products of this society simply imitateand reproduce the oeuvres of previous (pre-capitalist) societies,turning them over to mass consumption.  (Page 32)
- Thishas reached a point where it is no longer possible to distinguishbetween the false and the authentic, between the original and thecopies.  (Page 33)
- Underneath its pretended and pretentious newness, modernityconceals the tedium of the repetitive, its self-satisfied cud-chewingand regurgitation, the redundancy which would have us believein the intelligibility of this world. The redundant brilliance andthe appearance of newness in everyday cultural repetition con­ceal total reproduction. Conversely, the reproduction of the oldin the modern conceals the current society which is renewing andre-producing itself. For all its intensity, the "repetitive" can getrid of neither babelism, nor obsession, nor the rhetoric of Desireand Death. On the contrary, it has to invoke them, as diversions. (Page 34)
-  By separating time from space, itturns the schizoid into an explanatory principle. It is the belatedtheorisation of a version nf "leftism" that has run aground onthe politicisation of this or that real but peripheral issue (prison,drugs, insanity, etc.) and has then sunk back into a negation ofthe political.  (Page 34)
- Only a global pro­ject can begin to define all the rights of individuals and groups,by determining the conditions of their entry into practice. Let usnote some of these rights: the right to the town (the right not tobe thrown out of society and civilisation into some space whichhas been produced solely for the purpose of discrimination), andthe right to be different (the right not to be classified forciblyinto categories which have been determined by the necessarilyhomogenising powers). (Page 35) ^2af56a
- in order to extend the possible, it is necessary to proclaim anddesire the impossible.  (Page 36)
- The first point about the project is that it gives priority tosocial needs, not individual needs. This distinguishes it from thoseplans and programmes, inspired by the bourgeoisie as the rulingclass, which remain within the framework of the reproduction ofthe relations. All such plaHs and programmes, overtly or other­wise, always put individual needs (manipulated by advertising andthe mass media, etc.) in the forefront, even though individualneeds are themselves subordinate to growth and to the reproduc- (Page 36)
- tion of social relations. How can social needs be defined? Theyare complacently confused with the needs of the state and itspower, or with the demands and constraints of state-planned pro­duction, or with those of enterprises and workers supported by thestate.  (Page 37)
- The deepest problem is the problemof producing and managing a space that will correspond to thepossibilities of technology and knowledge, and also to the de­mands made on social life by and for the "masses". (Page 37)
- Obviously the realisation of this project depends on a decision,a decision by the working class. While the working class cannotdo everything by itself. and while there are contradictions at workwithin that class just as there are in every past, present andfuture reality, there is also nothing that can be done without it.The working class has the capacity for choice: reformism, revolu­tion, state planning and growth, whatever suits it. (Page 37)
- In the course of the process which we haveanalysed briefly here, the capitalist mode of production has rea­lised its concept as Marx determined it. leaving aside the modali­ties of this realisation. It has absorbed, resolved and integratedwhat history transmitted to it, i.e. the pre-capitalist relations ofproduction, agriculture, the town, the various sub-systems andpre-existing apparatuses of knowledge, justice, etc. It has sub- (Page 37)
- ordinated everything to its own operations by extending itself tospace as a whole; at the same time and because of this, it hasrealised, that is to say it has aggravated and exposed, its owncontradictions. It has even produced something new, which hasa tendency to outflank it. (Page 38)
- It is said that whenever the work­ing class fails to realise its autonomy, it has given in. Given into what? To "ideological pressure"? To the conjunctural advan­tages of a particular situation? Or even to the whole mode of pro­duction, to the reproduction of social relations? True, this repro­duction has not and still cannot be accomplished without a cer­tain amount of at least passive consent from the working class.But this does not mean that we can call it "complicity". and stillless "adherence" (Page 38)
-  The tacit re­sult of such substitution and displacement may well be the partialor total renewal of the previous relations of production under newnames. What's the good in fighting to change the political system,if it is only a question of changing the names? (Page 39)
- The aim is to take over development, to orient growth (recognisedand controlled as such) towards social needs. Whoever thereforetalks about the self-determination of the working class or aboutautonomy, is also talking about self-management. (Page 40)
- To consider not only the rational but the real to be alienationof desire, is to deprive desire of any actual basis; for undif­ferentiated desire must pass through need and the test of diverseneeds in order to recognise itself as desire. (Page 41)
-  The appeal of theunconditional ("desire", "instinct") is curiously reminiscent of acall for generalised violence (Page 41)

# Reproduction of relations of production 
- As for the capitalist mode of production, inMarx's terms this concept signifies the global result of the con­flictive relations "wage-capital" and "proletariat-bourgeoisie".These conflictive relations only enter into the social practice ofbourgeois society through forms which contain and mask them,e.g. the contractual form (the fictitiously free "labour contract",which links the members of the working class to those of thebourgeoisie and, supposedly, associates them).  (Page 43) 
- Marx seems tohave thought that the concept of "subject" was too imprecise, al­though he did allow that it was possible to impute a particularpolitical project to a particular class. He found the concept ofsystem unquestionably too rigid. Mode of production had theadvantages of system while avoiding the rigidity, and the advan­tages of "subject" without the ambiguity. (Page 43) 
- First, they consist of productive forces, namely the workers them­selves and their instruments of labour. The workers must re­produce themselves, have children, feed them and bring themup so that they are capable of working in their turn; the growthof productive forces is therefore accompanied by populationgrowth.  (Page 43) 
- All economic growth therefore impliessimultaneously the enlarged reproduction of labour and of plant,in other words of constant (fixed, invested) capital and of variablecapital (wages). (Page 44) 
- he showed that capitalism cannot realise theprocess without there being periods of conflict and spontaneousself-regulation of the social mean, i.e. economic crises. (Page 44) 
-  Sleep(resting time) plays a big part in the maintenance and reproduc­tion of labour power (means of production); but even when thecontext of sleep and the quality of the bedding and accommoda­tion are taken into account, it still cannot be said that sleep, assuch, enters into the reproduction of the social relations of pro­duction. But leisure certainly does. (Page 44) 
-  The revolution precedesthe transition. (Page 45) 
-  He demonstrates in the Grundrisse thatwhen the social relations are constituted they do not yet appearin their reality and in their truth; they permit, even demand, astruggle against the pre-existing relations.  (Page 45) 
- According to Marx, the problem can therefore no longer be asimple one of the reproduction of the means of production, butthe reproduction of the relations of production.  (Page 46) 
- Since Marx, a part of what he predicted-the end of competitivecapitalism -has come about. His prophecies, however, havenot been fulfilled according to the book. The collapse of freecompetitive capitalism has come about, through the concentra·tion and centralisation of capital; but this process has givencapitalism an unexpected elasticity and capacity for organisation.It resists crises and revolutionary convulsions-and especiallyin the advanced countries, contrary to Marx's predictions.  (Page 47) 
-  At the level of theory, theglobal learning presented in Capital has given way to fragmentarysciences: political economy, sociology, psychology etc. Moreover,each of these sciences claims to be able by its own means to attainglobal truths, not to mention the Truth. Meanwhile dialecticalthought clouds over, and traditional philosophy, condemned byMarx as he overtook it, has made a comeback. (Page 47) 
-  Social relations"implied in facts" are not even facts. It does not matter whetherthese robust champions of reality call themselves positivists orrationalists, they certainly don't waste time questioning the"facts" to discover what is concealed within them or to try andunderstand how it is that the social relations have lasted.  (Page 47) 
- For Nietzsche, the "social", which is the location andthe crux of human relations, always has something restricting andsuspect about it. It is an attitude far removed from that of mostmarxists, whose optimism concerning the "social" has withstoodeven the worst trials. (Page 48) 
-  He demonstrated that sexual and familial relation­ships have their counterparts in social relations.  (Page 49) 
-  "generative nucleus". (Page 50) 
-  There was supposed to be a distinctionbetween revolutionary "patriotism" and reactionary "nation­alism", although this abstract distinction did not prevent practicalconfusion from arising. The role of the nation and the nation statein the reproduction of the relations, as divulged by Trotsky, dis­appeared from the theoretical and political "field".  (Page 50) 
- The "sociology of labour", for example, makesa study of the enterprise, but in so doing it often bypasses theproblem: how are the capitalist relations of production per­petuated within the enterprise? And this in turn poses anotherproblem: can the relations of exploitation and domination, ofauthority and power (implying relations between those who makedecisions and those who carry them out), be perpetuated in theworkplace and in units of production alone?  (Page 51) 
- Pedagogical space is repressive. But the signi­ficance of this "structure" goes beyond a merely local oppression.Imposed knowledge, ingurgitated by the pupils and regurgitatedin exams, corresponds to the division of labour in bourgeoissociety, and therefore sustains it. This analysis, which developedout of Celestin Freinet's discovery of "active pedagogy", has ledto today's pursuit of the "institutional critique". (Page 52) 
-  Thus the primary, secondaryand higher levels of education not only re-enter the social divisionof labour as effects or products of it (which is what the liberal,moderate critique of education has tried to demonstrate), theyare an integral part of it-they are among its causes and rea­sons, its functions and structures. They are subordinated to thevarious capitalist markets (the commodity market, which animatesproduction, and the labour market, which supplies workers). (Page 52) 
- Instead, knowledge appears tohave its own structure. This structure possesses a kind of existenceand reality; it intervenes. But where, how? The structuralist ten­dency, quite literally by means of inhibiting the dialecticalcritique, alternately stimulates and paralyses reflection. And thesociology of education simply recoils in front of anything thatanalysis reveals to it: like general sociology, it prefers to go look­ing elsewhere (anywhere-history, anthropology, mythology, itdoesn't matter) for elements of an explanation, anything ratherthan make the leap forward, the decisive step which would enableit to locate the educational in the political. (Page 53) 
- At best,epistemological research simply isolates the "nuclei" of acquiredknowledge, or those which are supposed or claimed to be such. Ittherefore ratifies a division of intellectual labour which cannot helphaving some connection with the social division of labour, i.e.with the market (the market for intellectual products, within thebroader framework of the commodity and capital market -inother words. the world market). In sociology as in history, how­ever, epistemological reflection finds little that it can "establish",i.e. raise to the level of the university "establishment" of re­spected and respectable knowledge. (Page 54) 
- A revolution accompanies or follows a crisis inestablished authority: this much is correct, for without such acrisis, nothing revolutionary happens. The model will therefore betrue. But it is a trivial and general truth which is incapable ofexplaining any event, any revolution. Its sole meaning and aimis to liquidate critical understanding of bourgeois society andcapitalism as such, by substituting for them a "true" but actuallyfalse construction (or rather one which is neither true nor false,since in trying to explain everything it succeeds in explainingnothing). (Page 54) 
- A "model" is a temporary construction whichgets confronted with the "real". with other models. thus reveal- (Page 54) 
- ing discrepancies rather than adequacies.  (Page 55) 
- The methodology of models thus tends to elimi­nate both radical critique and the contradictions (the dialectic)of the lived. It is incapable of rising to a level where it can graspthe total as the reproduction of social relations. for it contributesto that reproduction. It leaves aside certain advisable scientificoperations. In effect, apart from the classic methods of induc­tion and deduction. there is also transduction: the construction ofvirtual objects. the exploration of the possible. (Page 55) 
- But their "social critique" comes to a halt in front ofthe barrier erected by the cult of the empirical affidavit (the so­called "sociological" fact). and by the liberal ideology inherentin this methodology. (Page 55) 
- One can say that these institutions constitute a whole, that thebureaucracy and the state make up the sum total of existing insti­tutions. But where and how can one grasp the exact relations andarticulations between the whole and the parts? What is the posi­tion of the economic and of political economy in this institutionalanalysis? One cannot simply abandon them in favour of a single"institutionalising" and "institutionalised" bureaucracy. To showhow an institution "reflects" or "expresses" a deeper or higherreality-whether it be "the unconscious" or "the historical",bureaucratic society or the bourgeois state, the economic or thesocial-is one thing. But to show how it contributes actively tothe production or reproduction of social relations is another story.Rene Lourau (in L'analyse institutionelle) poses the question, butfails to solve it.  (Page 56) 
-  His analysis leadstowards a general theory of leisure as illusory emancipation, anextension of capitalism which makes an active contribution to­wards the consolidation of its essential relations. It is true thatleisure (commercialised leisure, the "constitutive" of specialisedspace) marks an articulation of primary importance. But there isan enormous gulf between this partial. "socio-critical" kind ofanalysis and a general critical analysis. (Page 56) 
- For Marx. the critique of society bears on (and against)competitive capitalism; it is an integral part of a theoretical. non­specialised whole. It takes some effort to extend this to the terrainof neo-capitalism. It is much easier to turn against the initiatorsthan to take them further.  (Page 57) 
- The compromised sciences do noc. however, disappear; like theinstitutions themselves. they are a tough bunch. Political economy.which has been disqualified in social practice and found guiltyof supporting the existing society by functioning as its ideology(yet incapable of continuing to do so). has taken refuge in theuniversity, where it continues to be taken seriously. There it sits,perched on a branch in the tree of knowledge: in spite of Marx's"critique" of political economy. in spite of the fact that heexposed it to be the mere crumbs of knowledge, "knowledge inpieces". an ideology entangled with an all too real practice: thedistribution of scarcities and frustration. (Page 57) 
- After all. does knowledge have the right to escape contra­dictions? (Page 57) 
- Thus the (monetary) crisiswhich has been smouldering for several years goes hand in handwith a crisis in both political economy and economic policy. Thespecialised knowledge and fragmentary practices, which have per­meated the montage of so-called global Models, are in dissolution (Page 58) 
- The everyday, and not the economic in general. isthe level at which neo-capitalism has been able to establish itself.It has established itself upon the soil of the everyday, i.e. uponsomething solid, the social substance maintained by politicalauthorities. (Page 58) 
-  No one can claim the distinctionof having discovered it themselves. The concept rises togetherwith "the object", which is not constructed but born, in a multi­dimensional practice and in spite of the attempts to reduce it. Thishappens, and is produced, all around us (you, him, them. men andwomen). Nothing proceeds from the person who writes aboutthis object-in-birth. Nothing begins or ends with him. All he doesis bring together the given facts and concepts which othersseparate, having first sifted them through the theoretical andpractical critique. In order to perceive and conceive what revealsitself, it is simply sufficient not to blind oneself. (Page 59) 
- The rigidly dogmatic "total" concept evacuates history 'lvith­out further ado. And if one insists on the problem of history, onewill find that dogmatism has evacuated even the problem itself:it has been resolved in advance, it is an inadmissible question. Onenever suspected that such dogmatism was possible. The requisitionand inqudsition of knowledge that claims to be absolute (philoso­phically legitimated by the tough, solid, acquired nucleus ofepistemology) obscures spontaneity and power (the former beingthat which survives, blindly, and the latter being that whichintervenes consciously but from beyond science). (Page 61) 
- In this perspective the lived dis­perses, and is stowed amongst the ideological illusions and mis­recognition of self in the everyday. The concept without life issubstituted for the lived without concept; it is a retreat to thehegelian conception. As for Power, it does not like being con­ceived of. Since it cannot be reduced to a concept, it is "respected",and that is all it asks for. This treatment of the lived and ofpower is by no means even-handed, however: power is left inpeace in the shadows, while the shadows of the "lived" are sweptaside. (Page 61) 
-  Power (of politicians, technocra:ts, the military,in various combinations according to the conjuncture) soon findsjustifications for itself in knowledge. And Power recognises nolimits. (Page 62) 
- The relations of production contain contradictions. and espe­cially class (capital-wage) contradictions, which are enlarged intosocial (bourgeois-proletariat) and political (governing-governed)contradictions. One cannot show how the relations of productionare reproduced by emphasising the cohesion that is internal tocapitalism. One must also and above all show how the contra­dictions are enlarged and intensified on a worldwide scale. Theattempt of a separate "theoretical practice" to superimpose themode of production upon the relations of production. ascoherence upon contradiction, has only one aim: to liquidate thecontradictions and evacuate the conflicts (or at least the essentialones). by obscuring what happens to and results from these con­flicts. (Page 63) 
-  The relation between logicand dialectic in knowledge itself. as knowledge. is of primaryimportance today. Does knowledge transcend contradiction? Ordoes not it too contain internal-external contradictions. both initself and, abo·ve alL in relation to the "world", the world of the"lived", of misrecognition and the misrecognised? (Page 63) 
-  It appears thatevery contradiction reflects in itself its conditions of existencein the complex Whole, its situation in the structure. The contra­diction's de facto situation can only be conceived in its relationto the de jure situation, as a variation of the structural invariant"in dominance" (i.e. the determining instance, which dominatesfacts and situations of fact). Is it contradiction in general. or aparticular contradiction, which dominates?  (Page 64) 
- This aspect of structuralised marxism is not, for the moment,as important as the fact that it avoids the problem of the repro­duction of the relations o.f production. It simply repeats. redun­dantly, the definition of the mode of production. Capitalism iscapitalism -a tautology which substitutes itself for analysis o.fthe changes in capitalism, changes which cannot be reduced tovariations around a structural invariance. What happens in capi­talism is supposed to be understood by analogy either with thepast (what remains of history) or with the anticipated future(what remains of political foresight). Incoherence becomesmethodological. under the heading of rigour. (Page 65) 
-  The only way in which discoursecan avoid being "ideological" is by sliding into platitude. It goeswithout saying that structuralism evades the question of the re­production of the relations of production, by reducing it to acommonplace and self-perpetuating component, the reproductionof labour power (means of production). There is no mention ofany of the urban phenomena which have appeared or disappearedover two centuries. These, after all, are a minor detail beside the"structured whole" within which nothing happens (since it ispresent, as a whole, from the beginning). Rigorous conclusions canalways be drawn from the rigorous interlinking of tautologicalpropositions. One simply has to evade the essential fact, which isthat the precise location of the reproduction of the relations is theprecapitalist (historic) city, fragmented but inserted in a widerurban space. (Page 66) 
- The end can only be defined by the decay or collapse ofthe structure, not by the structure's changing hands (which ishow some people envisage the changeover from state capitalismto state socialism). In fact the process will probably be less cata­strophic than the first hypothesis suggests (total collapse), butmore eventful than the second (a mere change of hands): barringaccidents, that is. Under cover of the "epistemological break", thestructuralist "marxists" make a heavy-handed attempt to linkcapitalist technocracy with so-called socialist technocracy. (Page 67) 
- More precisely, this view of marxism states that there is a levelof determination at which the economic contradictions revealthemselves; the state intervenes as the instance which reduces(or partially resolves) these conflicts, according to the interests ofthe hegemonic section of the bourgeoisie and of capital.  (Page 67) 
-  The effectiveness of ideology is undeniable, butit is limited: it masks the contradictions for and in consciousness(in representations). At worst, it postpones the effects of thesecontradictions. It cannot suppress them. Clearly, without thegrowth of productive forces and population, ideology would neverbe able to maintain the relations of production; it can onlyconceal their reproduction.  (Page 68) 
-  This appears tolegitimise the "revenue" of capital, and conceals the fact that itactually consists (like the revenue from the soil and landed pro­perty) of surplus value. This means that there is a direct con­nection between socio-political practice and its representations(the ideologies of separation and "distinction"). The representa­tions conceal the concrete situation, while "expressing" it in theirown particular way. One cannot dissociate ideology from practiceby "presenting" it separately. (Page 69) 
-  It is the reproduction of the social relations. i.e. theability of capitalism to maintain itself during and beyond itscritical moments. Let's be as clear as possible about one thing: itis a problem which has been pushed aside and quite literallyrepressed.  (Page 70) 
- The world of commodities, i.e. the worldof exchange value, unfurls with its own logic and reduces usevalue to the use of signs. The world of signs replaces the world ofthings; signs themselves are the support of social relations, theyare the "objects of exchange". It is a world which de-dialectisesitself, defusing contradictions and conflicts. It puts an end to whatwas once "history", but at the same time forces the present toreturn to the past in order to change it into signs. (Page 71) 
-  If economic reality has lasted, it is because it contains certainself-regulations. From Capital onwards, Marx had at least begunto study these devices, and had shown how they involved conflicts.What he tries to show is that until the political revolution, theprinciples of cohesion cannot exterminate the contradictions, norcan these contradictions be eliminated by regulating mechanisms.Such mechanisms are blind and spontaneous. (Page 72) 
- The econo­mic at one time contained an internal form of self-regulation,which resulted from the social relations of production under com­petitive capitalism.  (Page 72) 
- If social practice (sustained growth) has enabled the socialrelations to be renewed, political economy is incapable of givingan account of this. Either it has contributed blindly (as an ideo­logy) to this reproduction, or it has passed by the problem on theopposite side of the road, keeping its eyes fixed above on those (Page 72) 
- beautiful models of equilibrium and growth, or rather equilibriumin growth (e.g. the "ideal" unity between full employment andprice stability). (Page 73) 
- The property of television is allegedly not to transmit an over­powering mass of information, but chiefly to reduce the spectatorto the passivity of pure contemplation pur regard) in front ofthe little screen. It is also to induce a series of intellectual opera­tions (message reception and decoding) which imply acceptance of (Page 74) 
- the network, the "channel", and therefore of its whole socialframework.  (Page 75) 
- The "neutralist" thesis, that knowledge is abovesocieties and classes and indeed that it is the conductor of socie­ties and classes, has always been lurking around, sustained bythe contrary thesis that so-called knowledge represents a (class)ideology.  (Page 75) 
- ideologies and representations (Page 75) 
- How can the intellectual division of labour be main­tained outside the social division of labour (i.e. the market)?How can it be spontaneously determined as a purely technical'division, external to the social division of labour (i.e. to the pres­sures of the market, or rather several markets)? This arrogant tech­nocratic thesis has not withstood the test either of critique or ofev,ents (even though Althusser has supported it). (Page 76) 
-  It may even be true to say that "pure" knowledge hasbecome the axis of (technocratic) state' capitalism as well as(technocratic) state socialism; it may serve as their commonmeasure, as "real world". It may be the guarantee of change, froma society which is manipulative (of people, of needs and of itsown aims) to a society which is even more smoothly manipulative. (Page 76) 
- It may thus serve the reproduction of the relations of productionbeyond the mode of production from which those relations wereborn.  (Page 76) 
- The fetishism of absolute knowledgecrushes the lived: but it is futile for the lived and the immediateto attempt to shake themselves free of knowledge. It is not asimple question of balancing the two extremes; there must be anattempt to elaborate a better position, a route for civilisationbetween rationalised barbarism and irrational barbarism. (Page 76) 
- These sciences miss the connection situatedat the global level between knowledge and power. The "scientificmind" fails to see how and where language and discourse dependon power and maintain it, particularly in the specialised sciencesof language and discourse. Like all institutions. discourse andlanguage are polyvalent: they convey needs and desires, poetry andideology, symbols and concepts, myths and truths, but especiallythey convey the conditions of state power, its signs and key-words. (Page 77) 
- Cultural consumption of theartistic past or of the "neo" (realism, plasticism, classicism, etc.)would have not the slightest socio-political influence without theconsumption of material goods.  (Page 78) 
- Strategy springs from an interconnection of chances and necessi­ties which are always particular ones: confrontations betweendiverse and unequal forces, split into two opposing camps (andif there are three camps, the situation becomes that much morecomplex). Many elements play their part: the goals, interests,wills, and representations of the various factions involved in thestruggle, and the conceptions of the leaders. The theoretical unityresulting from these relations taken as a whole, the horizon madeup of partial acts, the vision of the total (which is inaccessibleas such to each of the participants taken separately, but which intheir thoughts and consciousnesses is either possible or impos­sible): this is Strategy, in Clausewitz's sense. (Page 79) 
- Politicsconsists of the search for Power, the maintenance of Power andof the established order. But marxist politics implies the critiqueof all politics and of every State; it seeks to put an end to them.To present an absolute politics to an absolute knowledge, there­fore, destroys marxist thought at its roots. Strategy is the summitof knowledge, the articulation between practice and theory: itcannot supplant philosophy, nor prolong it (Page 80) 
- Contrary to the ouvrieriste way of thinking, the working classon a world scale cannot claim to be exempt from all responsibilityfor perpetuating the social relations of exploitation and domina­tion. However, it is not to blame either. Other social layers andclasses are not going to take over its unaccomplished "historicalmission". The working class is distinct from the world proletariat.The latter includes landless peasants, a "proletarianised" part ofthe petty bourgeoisie, a section of the liberal professions and in­tellectuals, and a "sub-proletariat".  (Page 81) 
-  Capitalism has not only subordinated exterior and anteriorsectors to itself, it has produced new sectors, transforming whatpre-existed and completely overthrowing the conesponding insti·tutions and organisations. The same is true of "art", knowledge,"leisure", urban and everyday reality. It is a vast process which, asusual. is wrapped in appearances and ideological masks.  (Page 83) 
-  Space, occupied by neo-capitalism, sectioned, re­duced to homogeneity yet fragmented, becomes the seat of power. (Page 83) 
- Naturalspace is destroyed and transformed into a social product by anensemble of techniques, particularly physics and informationscience. But this growth of productive forces continues to generatespecific contradictions which it reproduces and aggravates. On theone hand it destroys nature and transforms material space, buton the other hand, private property (private ownership of landand therefore of natural space) keeps productive power tied downto the framework of past eras of agricultural production andrural "nature" (Page 84) 
- Thus leisureenters into the division of social labour-not simply becauseleisure permits labour power to recuperate, but also because thereis a leisure industry, a large-scale commercialisation of specialisedspaces, a division of social labour which is projected "on theground" and enters into global planning. In this way the countrytakes on a new profile, a new face and new landscapes. (Page 84) 
- Having become political. social space is on the one handcentralised and fixed in a political centrality, and on the otherhand specialised and parcelled out.  (Page 84) 
- This new globality, which consciously or otherwise finds itsdirection and its goal in the reproduction of the social relationseven more than in immediate profit and growth of production, isaccompanied by a profound qualitative alteration in these rela­tions. The relations of domination originally underlay and rein­forced the relations of exploitation, but now they become essen­tial. central. The will to power (the capacity for constraint andviolence) goes beyond the taste for profit and filthy lucre, beyondthe search for super-or maximum profit. Economic and sociallaws begin to lose what Marx described as their physical (natural)and therefore blind and spontaneous characteristics, and becomeincreasingly constricting beneath the contractual mask. (Page 85) 
- At the theoretical level this betrays (rather than simply un­covers) a global strategy; it constitutes a new totality, whoseelements appear to be both joined (joined in space by authorityand by quantification) and disjoined (disjoined in that samefragmented space and by that same authority, which uses itspower in order to unite by separating and to separate by uniting).There is the everyday, which is reduced to programmed consump­tion and is cut off from the possibilities opened up by technology.There is the urban, which is reduced to fragments around the statecentrality. And finally there are differences. which are reduced tohomogeneity by the constricting powers. (Page 85) 
- The strategic paradox is the fact that confrontation accompaniesthe extension and consolidation of the relations like their shadow,putting them constantly in danger-not in the same way thatideology accompanies knowledge, or error truth, but more subtlythan that. The consolidation needs centres; it needs to fix them,to monumentalise them (socially) and specialise them (mentally).Confrontation, on the other hand, springs up abruptly here orthere, in a thousand forms, from oral protest to strikes, from theguerrilla to the vast and well-prepared operation. Creative nega­tion creates a makeshift. momentary centre and then moves onelsewhere. (Page 86) 
- The current "struc­ture" of the Person reproduces the social relations in its own way,and introduces them into the immediate relations of family, mar­riage and sex, parent-child and "superior"-"inferior" relations. (Page 87) 
-  Government projects have always. in fact, hadonly one aim: to offload some of their responsibilities on to localand regional organisms while preserving the mechanisms of powerintact.  (Page 87) 
- The architect receives whatmight be termed a social commission, forcing him to realisespaces which suit soci�ty, i.e. which "reflect" its relations by con­cealing them under the decor (always assuming his budget runsto a bit of decor).  (Page 88) 
-  It attempts to conceal the meaning but only succeeds inproclaiming it: these are the places of official Power, the placeswhere Power is concentrated, where it reflects itself. looks downfrom above-and is transparent. The Phallic unites with the poli­tical; verticality symbolises Power. Constructed space-a trans­parency of metal and glass-tells aloud of the will to power andall its trickery. It is hardly necessary to add that the "habitat" tooshares in this spatial distribution of domination. (Page 88) 
- For centuries it was thearchitect's jab to protect a space against nature by abstracting it,isolating it behind walls and filling the emptiness with religiousand political symbols, with devices corresponding to the estab­lished order. Today, his job should be to produce a space by pro­tecting it against power, and to adapt it to relations freedfrom constraints.  (Page 88) 
-  The social relations remain entangled in theconstraints, and except in the case of revolt, confrontation or re­volution, social space remains the social space of Power. (Page 88) 
- The reproduction of the relations of production enlarges, wesaid, by reproducing the fundamental contradictions: the contra­diction between happiness and boredom has turned into a runningsore. The great positive minds will no doubt regard it as utterlyutopian and unrealistic to introduce boredom into a theoreticaland political discussion. For them, boredom doesn't count. Reallyit doesn't. Let's not insist, however, on this curious contrastbetween realised boredom and promised happiness.  (Page 89) 
- Thereis obsolete knowledge, just as there are obsolete societies. The dic­tatorship of a "pure" and therefore fetishised knowledge, to­gether with the dictatorship of the Eye and the Phallus, and thedictatorship of the Power embodied in any specific spatiality: thisdictatorship of the True turns into fragments and collapses, lay­ing bare the soil on which an appropriate mental and social archi­tecture can be built. (Page 90) 
-  The concepts of space, of the everyday, of the urban and of dif­ference, are not a part of the system, which is a system of spacedominated by the strategy of homogenisation and of the pro­grammed everyday. But they still have to free themselves fromthat system. (Page 90) 
- Reproduction does not occurwithout undergoing changes. This excludes both the idea of anautomatic reproductive process internal to the constituted mode (Page 90) 
- of production (as system) and that o.f the immediate efficacityof a "generative nucleus".  (Page 91) 
- The transition has not followed the political revolution,as it did in Marx's outline. It precedes it.  (Page 91) 
-  The new "values" are not imposed: they are proposed. (Page 91) 