- Far from encouraging such change and accelerating its ordered advance, architectureand planning would appear to show no realization of its capacity to make such a contribution. In fact, most architects and planners have consistently produced three-dimensional packaged ammunition for the reactionaries (P. 1)
- Change and flexibility in architecture and planning is associated by the professions withthe adaptation, extension, or most progressively with the limited life of structures and organizations, which, however, are permanently dependent on their particular siting orinteraction with other artifacts. Thus, while institutions, trades and activities question their very existence, the architects and planners are tearing their guts out looking fornew ways to justify such existence. (P. 1)
- However, once architects and planners rid themselves of the idea that they are capable, through that which they leave on the ground, of re-orientating the past to the advantage of the present generation, then it is likely that the following objectives can beundertaken in the cause of life-conditioning only by good architects and planners. (P. 2)
- A realization that image-making has passed from Easter Island via the Cathedral Builders to the International Publishing Corp., and that architectural imagery in theminds of observers is always related with delight to the personal relevance of theobserved project, even if only a building. (P. 2)
- limited-term personal predilection, the value judgement on a house or town is not forthe users to make but for posterity (P. 3)
- An activity that will increasingly occupy a large proportion of everyone’s life should bein contact with areas near and far where the rest of life is to be spent.Education, if it is to become a continuous human-servicing service run by the community, must be provided with the same lack of peculiarity as the supply of drinkingwater or free teeth. (p. 3)
- Institutions today are too small and too exclusive. Because advanced education is notregarded as a major national industry, it is in danger of failing to achieve both a recognizable social relevance and a capacity to initiate progress rather than an attemptto catch up with it. (p. 3)
- A firm re-assessment of housing requirements together with an avoidance in the firststage of development of any civic design indicates the real order of priorities. (p. 4)
- Further education and re-education must be viewed as a major industrial undertakingand not as a service run by gentlemen for the few. Its resultant quality must stimulateits further use and not, as at the present merely enable statisticians to predict futuredemand under present conditions. (p. 4)

## Source
[[PRICE, Cedric - life conditioning.pdf]]